---
title: Harvesting and Curing Culms
category: Craft
id: SEED-HARVEST
---

Choosing culms
Harvest culms when they are mature, usually between three and five years old. Younger culms are still soft and shrink, split or rot as they dry. Older culms become brittle. Mark each new culm with the year it emerged, using a paint pen or a small tag, so its age is always known.

A good rule for a healthy grove is to take no more than about a third of the mature culms in any one year. The standing culms feed the rhizomes that produce next year's shoots.

When to cut
Cut in the dry, cool part of the year, in autumn or winter for temperate groves, and never during the spring shooting season. At that time the culms hold less starch and sugar, which makes them far less attractive to powder post beetles and other borers.

How to cut
Use a fine toothed saw and cut just above a node, close to the ground. Cutting above a node leaves no hollow stump to collect rainwater, which would otherwise rot and can harm the rhizome below.

Warning: bamboo splinters are sharp and culms can split suddenly under tension. Wear gloves and eye protection, and support long culms as they fall so they do not crack or strike anyone nearby.

Clump curing
After cutting, a traditional step is to stand the culm upright in the grove with its branches and leaves still attached, raised off the soil on a stone, for several weeks. The leaves keep transpiring, drawing moisture and starch out of the culm. This lowers the risk of insect attack and helps the culm dry more evenly.

Treatment
For lasting indoor or sheltered use, culms are often treated with borate salts, a mix of borax and boric acid dissolved in water. The culm is soaked, or the solution is fed through the internodes after piercing the diaphragms, for several days. Borate treatment protects against insects and fungi but can wash out, so treated bamboo should be kept away from constant rain and ground contact.

Drying and storage
Dry culms slowly in a shaded, airy place, never in direct sun, which causes cracking. Store them horizontally on supports spaced closely enough to stop sagging, or vertically in a rack, well off the ground. Drying typically takes six to twelve weeks depending on the culm and the climate.
