---
title: Moso Bamboo at a Glance
category: Species
id: SEED-MOSO
---

Moso bamboo, Phyllostachys edulis, is a giant temperate bamboo native to China and widely grown in Japan, where it was introduced centuries ago. It is the most important timber bamboo in East Asia and supplies much of the bamboo used for flooring, boards, textiles and edible shoots.

Growth habit
Moso is a running bamboo. It spreads through long underground stems called rhizomes, which can travel several metres in a single season when the plant is well established and the soil is loose. Each spring, buds on the rhizomes swell into shoots that push up through the soil.

A new shoot emerges with its final diameter already set. It does not grow thicker in later years. Instead, the shoot telescopes upward very quickly, reaching its full height in roughly two months. Mature culms in a healthy grove commonly reach 15 to 20 metres, and exceptional culms grow taller still, with diameters that can approach 20 centimetres at the base.

During the first year the culm is soft and green, with a fine white bloom on its surface. Over the next three to five years the walls harden as the culm lignifies. A single culm usually lives for around ten years before it declines, while the grove as a whole persists through its rhizome network.

Young plants are small. A newly planted moso produces thin culms for its first few years. The diameter of new shoots increases year by year as the rhizome system gathers energy, so patience is part of growing this species.

Flowering
Moso flowers rarely and at long, irregular intervals, often cited as around six decades. Flowering exhausts the culms, and a flowering grove can decline heavily before recovering from seed or surviving rhizomes.

Uses
The shoots are eaten fresh in spring and are best harvested just as the tip breaks the soil. Raw bamboo shoots contain natural compounds that release cyanide, so they must always be peeled and boiled before eating. Mature culms of three years or more are harvested for construction and craft.
