---
title: Planting and Everyday Care
category: Care
id: SEED-CARE
---

Site and soil
Most bamboos want moist but well drained soil that is rich in organic matter, with a slightly acidic to neutral pH of around 6 to 7. Heavy clay that stays waterlogged will rot the rhizomes, while very sandy soil dries too quickly. Work generous compost into the planting area before planting.

Planting
Plant in spring or early autumn so the roots can settle before summer heat or winter cold. Set the root ball at the same depth it sat in its pot, fill with improved soil, and water deeply to remove air pockets. A layer of mulch five to ten centimetres thick keeps the soil cool and moist. Fallen bamboo leaves are an excellent mulch and should be left under the plant, since they return silica to the soil.

Watering
Water deeply and regularly during the first year, especially in dry weather. Established plants are more tolerant, but still perform best with steady moisture during the spring shooting season.

Reading the leaves
Leaves that curl lengthwise into narrow tubes are a sign of water stress. The plant is closing its leaves to reduce water loss, and it needs watering.
Leaves that turn yellow across the whole plant, together with soggy soil, usually point to overwatering or poor drainage.
Some yellowing and leaf drop in spring is normal. Bamboo is evergreen, but it replaces a large share of its older leaves each spring as new growth begins.

Feeding
Bamboo is a grass and responds well to nitrogen. A balanced or nitrogen rich lawn type fertiliser applied in early spring and again in early summer supports strong shoots. Avoid feeding late in the season, as soft growth is easily damaged by frost.

Thinning
Each year after the shooting season, remove dead, damaged and very old culms at ground level. Thinning lets light and air into the grove and keeps the remaining culms looking clean. Topping a culm, that is cutting it above a node, stops that culm from ever growing taller, although branches below the cut will fill out.

Cold hardiness
Many Phyllostachys species tolerate winter lows of roughly minus 18 to minus 20 degrees Celsius once established, though leaves may be damaged at the lower end of that range. Several Fargesia species are hardier still, surviving roughly minus 25 degrees Celsius or lower. Young plants are always more tender than established ones, so a thick winter mulch helps during the first winters.
