---
title: Running and Clumping Bamboo
category: Growth
id: SEED-RHIZOME
---

Bamboos fall into two broad groups according to how their rhizomes grow. Knowing which group a plant belongs to matters more than almost anything else when choosing where to plant it.

Running bamboo
Running bamboos have leptomorph rhizomes. These are long, thin, horizontal stems that travel away from the parent plant and send up new culms at intervals along their length. Phyllostachys, the genus that includes moso and many popular garden species, is the best known group of runners. Once established, a running bamboo can spread several metres in a season and can cross under paths and into neighbouring gardens.

Warning: never plant a running bamboo in open ground without a plan for containment. Removing an established running grove is slow, heavy work that can take several seasons.

Containing a runner
The most common method is a rhizome barrier made of high density polyethylene, usually about 1.5 millimetres thick. The barrier is set vertically in a trench around the planting, between 60 and 75 centimetres deep, with around 5 centimetres left above the soil surface. The ends are overlapped and sealed with a clamp or stainless steel strip rather than simply butted together.

Rhizomes cannot pass through the barrier, but they can travel along it and occasionally climb over the exposed rim. Walk the edge once a year, usually in late summer or early autumn, and cut any rhizome that has crossed the top.

Where a barrier is not practical, a shallow trench about 25 centimetres deep can be kept open around the grove. Running rhizomes tend to stay near the surface, so they appear in the trench and can be cut back each year with a spade.

Clumping bamboo
Clumping bamboos have pachymorph rhizomes. These are short and thick, and each one turns upward to form a culm close to its parent. The plant widens slowly into a tight clump, usually by only a few centimetres to a few tens of centimetres per year, and does not need a barrier.

Fargesia is the main group of cold hardy clumpers. These mountain bamboos come from central China, prefer partial shade and cool summers, and are well suited to hedges in temperate gardens. Bambusa and many other clumping genera are tropical or subtropical and need mild winters.
